In Examination mode, the blocker level is not displayed.  Instead, whether a particular blocker is currently acting or not will be shown and this information is updated every minute. Unlike in Tutorial mode, the blocker action (levels) cannot be removed when running in Examination mode.

During live experiments, saline must be injected immediately after each drug administration in order to flush the drug remaining in the catheter. Otherwise, the remaining drug gets mixed with the next drug administered leading to an unpredictable response

The carotid occlusion (common carotid) leads to an increase in BP due to a reduction in baroreceptor impulses. It leads to increased chemoreceptor activity (carotid body) due to reduced pressure in the baroreceptor area and reduced blood flow through carotid body. Alpha adrenergic blockers will abolish the effect of carotid occlusion.

Electrical stimulation of the central cut end of vagus often leads to a decrease in BP. Afferent impulses traveling along the stimulated vagus nerve to the cardioinhibitory centre, and efferent impulses passing down the other intact vagus nerve (Fundamentals of Experimental Pharmacology, 3rd ed. By M.H. Ghosh). An unexplained increase in BP and HR has been noticed on some occasions. Atropine will block the effects of vagal stimulation.
Epinephrine (adrenaline) stimulates both alpha as well as beta receptors. This is the reason why it produces a biphasic effect of BP-pressor response followed by a short depressor response.

To elicit the beta action of epinephrine, administer a low dose that is 0.1 μg/kg or administer epinephrine following an alpha adrenergic blocker.
Sir Henry H Dale (1875 – 1968) demonstrated that adrenaline (which increases BP when given alone), elicits a depressor response after ergotoxine (an alpha adrenergic blocker) administration. This came to be known as ‘Dale’s vasomotor reversal’ or ‘epinephrine reversal’.
Isoprenaline has a slight pressor response or no action on systolic BP but it decreases diastolic BP considerably. As a result, the mean BP shows a fall.
Alpha adrenergic blockers will block the pressor response of epinephrine but not its depressor response. Epinephrine, which increases BP normally, will reduce BP after administration of an alpha adrenergic blocker.

Ach has a very short action. In animals pretreated with physostigmine, Ach acts longer since physostigmine is an anticholinesterase. Cholinesterases are enzymes which destry Ach. (Simulation of physostigmine effects are not provided in this experiment)

Low doses of Ach when given intravenously will produce reflex tachycardia; larger doses will lead to bradycardia.

Ach and atropine exhibit competitive antagonism. Following the administration of atropine, the recommended or the conventional doses of Ach (5-10 μg/kg) fail to elicit any response, whereas a high dose (close to 35 μg/kg) will produce a ‘Nicotinic action ‘ or ‘Ganglionic action’.

Ephedrine, if repeated within 30 minutes, exhibit tachyphylaxis (acute tolerance). To demonstrate this phenomenon, repeat administration of a single dose 4 to 5 times within a span of 30 minutes.

Ephedrine has both direct as well as indirect action. It releases norepinephrine from nerve endings and this leads to tachyphylaxis after a few doses (the norepinephrine stores get exhausted). Because the drug can stimulate the alpha receptors, there is a slight increase in BP which might persist even after repeated doses.

Stimulation of H1 receptors leads to a rapid onset but short-lived decrease in BP; H2 receptors induce a slow onset, longer lasting fall in BP. Blockade of either of the receptors will only partially reduce the effect of histamine. If histamine effect is to be blocked fully, both H1¬ and H2 antagonists must be used.

The recording of the results of carotid and vagal procedures and administration of agonists is called “normal response brackets” (normal panel). Before and after giving a dose of unknown, normal response brackets must be recorded and differences in the responses (before and after). If any, must be detected. This will help in preliminary identification of the unknown drug.

If there is no difference in the normal response brackets (before and after the unknown), the unknown could be an agonist. Administer a suitable blocker to find out whether the effect of unknown is blocked or not.

The unknown drug could be a blocker too and hence the unknown drug must be judiciously given. Do not exceed the recommended dose of 0.1 to 0.2 ml. Start with 0.1 ml and repeat it only when there is a need. If the unknown is a blocker, repeated doses of it might kill the dog.


 


